Introduction to Jupyter Notebook[¶](https://minerva.leeds.ac.uk/bbcswebdav/institution/Inter-faculty/ODLC/artificial_intelligence/OCOM5100M_ProgrammingForDataScience/MKDocs_Site/content/unit1/1_03_introduction-to-jupyter-notebook/#introduction-to-jupyter-notebook "Permanent link")
=========================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

In this module, you will complete activities in Jupyter Notebook. Jupyter Notebook is a **notebook interface** or **computational notebook**.

Learning outcomes

After completing this lesson you should be able to:

-   understand the notebook style of programming
-   understand the advantages and disadvantages of notebook programming.

What is the notebook style of programming?[¶](https://minerva.leeds.ac.uk/bbcswebdav/institution/Inter-faculty/ODLC/artificial_intelligence/OCOM5100M_ProgrammingForDataScience/MKDocs_Site/content/unit1/1_03_introduction-to-jupyter-notebook/#what-is-the-notebook-style-of-programming "Permanent link")
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A **notebook interface** or **computational notebook** is a type of programming tool that enables a style of coding known as [literate programming](http://www.literateprogramming.com/).

The idea behind literate programming is that the purpose, functionality and logic of a program are explained by means of natural language descriptions that are included with the actual source code of the program. In other words, the executable code of a program is shown with documentation of what it is for and how it works.

To support this kind of programming, we need a notebook file format and a programming environment that provides the means for displaying, editing, executing and viewing the output of notebook files. Typically, such a system would be built on top of an existing programming language by:

-   extending its file format to incorporate additional documenting information
-   providing a development tool that allows editing and display of this additional information as well editing and execution of program code.

Jupyter Notebook[¶](https://minerva.leeds.ac.uk/bbcswebdav/institution/Inter-faculty/ODLC/artificial_intelligence/OCOM5100M_ProgrammingForDataScience/MKDocs_Site/content/unit1/1_03_introduction-to-jupyter-notebook/#jupyter-notebook "Permanent link")
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the case of Jupyter, the notebook is built on top of the Python language. The file format used by Jupyter is **IPython NoteBook**. Files in this format normally have file names ending in the extension `.ipynb` and will be referred to as `ipynb` files.

The content of `ipynb` files is primarily organised into two types of cell:

-   **Python code cells** contain code that is just like Python code that would be written in a non-notebook programming environment, although some code may contain commands that are specifically designed for use in notebooks (such as for displaying output in particular ways within the notebook)
-   **Markdown cells** contain textual information whose layout can be specified by the `markdown` notation, which enables formatting such as headers and bullet-point lists to be specified. These cells also allow the use of HTML formatting and allow hyperlinks and images to be inserted.

`ipynb` files also contain some other information regarding properties of the file and outputs that have been generated by the code cells, but this is created automatically, not edited by the programmer.

There are actually several varieties of Jupyter notebook programming environment, but they are all very similar both in their appearance and functionality. These environments all have the following general properties and capabilities:

-   The interface is web-based. This means that the user normally interacts with the Jupyter programming environment via a web browser (such as Chrome, Firefox, or Edge).

-   Code execution and file storage are handled via a server, which is a separate program running either locally on the user's machine (for example, the Jupyter notebook server that comes with an Anaconda Python installation) or on a remote machine (for example, provided by a cloud-based service, such as Google's Colab).

-   Code cells can be executed either individually one at a time in sequence, or all code in the notebook can be executed.

-   Code output will be displayed below each code cell after it is run. The code output can also be enhanced by various formatting and graphical tools.

-   When markdown cells are executed, they are rendered into the format specified by markdown notations within the cell.

-   There are a wide variety of other commands such as: file loading and saving, cutting, pasting, searching, clearing output and restarting. These functions are provided by means of menus and hot-keys.

Advantages of the notebook style of programming[¶](https://minerva.leeds.ac.uk/bbcswebdav/institution/Inter-faculty/ODLC/artificial_intelligence/OCOM5100M_ProgrammingForDataScience/MKDocs_Site/content/unit1/1_03_introduction-to-jupyter-notebook/#advantages-of-the-notebook-style-of-programming "Permanent link")
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The main advantages of using a notebook style programming environment include the following:

-   Notebooks provide a convenient way of planning and documenting code.

-   Because documentation is within the same file as the code it is less likely to be forgotten or ignored.

-   The division of code into cells is well suited to a **pipeline** style of programming, where computational processing and/or data analysis proceeds in a series of steps. This division can make programming easier, since each step is a small and relatively simple part of a larger more complex computation. It also enables analysis and testing to be carried out between stages of the sequence, which can improve reliability.

-   Because program output can also be nicely displayed, the notebook can also function as a report that presents and explains the results that have been obtained from the code.

-   The ability to include nicely formatted explanations, hyperlinks and images along with the code make notebooks an excellent medium for sharing information, as well as for teaching and learning.

Disadvantages of notebook programming[¶](https://minerva.leeds.ac.uk/bbcswebdav/institution/Inter-faculty/ODLC/artificial_intelligence/OCOM5100M_ProgrammingForDataScience/MKDocs_Site/content/unit1/1_03_introduction-to-jupyter-notebook/#disadvantages-of-notebook-programming "Permanent link")
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Not all programmers are convinced by the advantages of notebook programming. There are some disadvantages, including the following:

-   They only provide a limited subset of the system development functionality that is available in advanced non-notebook integrated development environments (such as Eclipse).

-   They do not provide good support for developing large systems that involve many complex components. Although it is normal to import many Python modules into a notebook, it is not so usual or convenient to write a system in the form of many notebook files.

-   They do not promote a good style of structured programming. This is because the linear execution of small program snippets within a notebook does not motivate attention to code structure and modularity. But modularity is vital to ensuring reliability of complex software systems that contain many inter-related components.

It is likely that in the future, some of these disadvantages will be mitigated by combining functionalities of notebook programming with those of the more traditional software development environments.

Lesson complete[¶](https://minerva.leeds.ac.uk/bbcswebdav/institution/Inter-faculty/ODLC/artificial_intelligence/OCOM5100M_ProgrammingForDataScience/MKDocs_Site/content/unit1/1_03_introduction-to-jupyter-notebook/#lesson-complete "Permanent link")
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You have looked at the notebook style of programming, and you have seen that you can use Jupyter Notebook to create Python and Markdown code cells. You also now understand the advantages and disadvantages of notebook programming.

In the next activity you will look at the main features of Jupyter Notebook, and how to create Python and Markdown code boxes. You will also create your Personal Log notebook to use throughout this module.